Okay. You like teamwork. Yeah. And you were seeing
other people and step with you and you were
attempting to do your part. You were attempting to
keep a straight line. When you were working with
artillery pieces, you were you wanted your part to
be done when it needed to be done. If you want a
rammer or you were carrying a projectile or
whatever. I didn't want to buy weight. I wanted to
If the breach needed opening, I didn't want the man
with the projector waiting on me. And these kind of
things have always fascinated me. I've always
wanted to have my part done and nobody waiting on
me. I don't know whether that's one of the things
that projects you out forward of others or
whatever, but it was just something about it that
was fascinating. Now as a day student did you
really feel part of the Corps or did in some ways you
felt discriminated against? No I missed a whole
lot. I missed a great deal. Didn't live in the
dormitory. Got in on none of the hazing. I hardly
ever went in the dormitory unless I went to study
with some fellow student. So I know I missed a great
deal of the core life, but farther up I went into the
junior and senior year, of course I got more into
the swing of it. But I did, I'm sure I missed a great
deal of it. Some of it I guess I'm glad I missed. Some
of it that I could probably look back on with a lot of
enjoyment. Let's talk about your outfit. Were you
part of an outfit? Yes. What kind of training did
you have? Could you tell me about that? You're
talking about in the Corps? Yeah. They actually
had day student organizations made up of day
students. Oh, day students. So you were in a day
student outfit. That's right. As I remember, that
was only
freshman, sophomore years that they had the day
student outfits. I could, they could have been
into the junior, senior, but I know the freshman
year we were in what we called day students. It was a
Coast Artillery, one of the Coast Artillery
units. Oh, so you, so you got into Coast Artillery
early then. I started out in Coast Artillery and I
was wondering how you got in now. For the reason
was, Seacoast Artillery, which I was in, They,
most all the calculations, the projections, the
anticipated travel of the projectiles and all
this was done mathematically, manually, with
slide rules and this sort of thing. But they
encouraged engineers to get into the Coast
Artillery, and particularly Seacoast. Now, a lot
of my classmates were in the Corps of Engineers,
which I probably should have been but I listened to
the counselor or whoever and he says that Coast
Artillery is a good place for engineers because of
your mathematical training and education and
whatnot so I got in Coast Artillery and it was Oh I
can't regret it a whole lot. I had a lot of
experiences that gave me a great deal of
satisfaction but that's what I was in and that's
why. I didn't really know except that somebody
said don't get in the infantry. and that's the
thing I thought I didn't want in but you know that's
a pretty important area too. So as a Coast
Artillery Officer then would you be basically
what we call fire control today? I mean were you
oriented toward hitting the targets then? Well,
are you talking about when I was on active duty?
Yeah, to begin with in your first first few years of
active duty. Is that what they tried to, let me
rephrase that. Is that what they tried to train you
to do when you were here in the Corps? Well, yes. You
had training in, you see, Coastal Artillery, our
targets were vessels. And the way they aimed and
spotted them, unless it was what they used to call
Case 3 where you couldn't see them, they were over
the horizon, Then it was all done by catching the
ship here and here and you knew in so many seconds
he'd be here. That's the way we aimed. Now if he was
over the horizon with the big guns then it had to be
some more calculations but that's the type of
thing that I'm talking about and then if the burst
hit here You knew you were short so many seconds,
feet, and whatever, and you recalculated. But
that was all, that was the basic training of
Coastal Artillery. But when I got on active duty,
the fact that I was an engineer, I was more directed
toward surveying in baselines, establishing
base end positions that had to be exactly
measured, They had to be exactly oriented. And I
took survey crews and did this sort of thing for the
fire control batteries and people that had to
occupy these. And our spotting was done with a
triangle, see, from these known points to this. So
I did a lot of surveying. So, but it was... So, yeah,
it's a generally problem. That's what it was.
That's fascinating. For fixed coast
artillery... You had a fixed end here and a fixed
end here with an absolute known distance on the
base and that's right and then you had a you had a one
line and two angles you always knew and so they
could they could project so that was part of my
duties for a good long while was establishing
these things. And what kind of training did you get
down here at A&M in the court? Well, I was, of
course, along with all the rest of them. We studied
projectile travel, projectile
variance due to various elements in the air and
care of the guns. Of course, a lot of leadership
courses is all the services. But it was mainly
aimed toward being an artilleryman.
The first two years are pretty basic, reality's
what you're in. But a lot of the infantry tactics
and parades are always fascinating. I loved that
parade. I really did. I used to love those parades
out there at the university, you know, the final
reviews and the Mother's Day reviews and all these
things. I loved those things. After I got on active
duty, I really liked the parade. I did. I sure did.
Why do you think that? You like the unison? That's
right. Again, it's seeing people executing
commands, seeing people following orders,
seeing people act in unison. You know,
everybody... Everybody got to be in step. If not,
you sit, you know. It's just, it's that
regimentation, I guess. You must love the Aggie
band. Oh, that's the greatest thing in the world.
It just tingles my spine, and I've seen it 10
million times. That's incredible, isn't it?
Couldn't believe it when I saw it when I came down
here. Had you never seen it before? Oh, I never
have. I might have had seen it on national
television when they used to carry the Texas and
the A&M games back when they played the
Thanksgiving games, but now you don't see those on
national television. It's absolutely
fascinating. The farther up the line of command I
got, I guess the more I enjoyed it. Even after I got
to be a brigadier general on the beach. We always
had a parade at some camp and we've had as many as,
oh, at one time our unit had about 4,000 people in
it. We've been to camp with 3,000, 3,500. That
makes a pretty good parade. But we always had a
parade, sometimes and sometimes not. Could you
tell me about your colleagues in the Corps of
Cadets, people that you went through? I made some
real good friends.
In fact, a lot of the ones, a lot of my senior, junior
and senior and probably sophomore compadres, as I
said a while ago, were called active youth at the
same time. There was a colonel who used to be our, we
call him, War Department inspector. Once a year,
the War Department sent regular Army people down
to inspect the units, the seniors and juniors, and
I think mostly seniors and juniors, to evaluate
the ROTC program. I'm sure it's still done. But
this old colonel, I remember in particular, had
been there a couple, three times. And how he got
picked to organize this Coastal Artillery Unit, I
really don't know, because that's done through
the War Department. But he did, and apparently got
the opportunity to select officers that he could
call active duty. But we were called almost a year
before Pearl Harbor. I got one of those early
calls. And he selected about 60% of us from A&M. And
gosh, I bet you there was half of my Coast Artillery
class that got called to this unit. So not only made
the friends there, but had them for four years
during World War II. And right to this day, we still
have a reunion of the World War II. Oh, really? How
many are you? Well, this past summer, there are
more than we get together, but this past summer we
had a reunion set. There were, I guess, 16 of us that
were going to go all the way to Myrtle Beach, South
Carolina. to be with one of our commanding
officers, and he was taken to Walter Reed Hospital
and subsequently died, so we had to call off the
reunion. But, well, I guess we were probably 17 or
18. There still goes, every time we call or every
time we've had a reunion, we've had about 21
reunions since World War II. So, it was a
camaraderie that really did last. So, you know.
That's tremendous. It is, and it started right
there in A&M. Of course, they've got a spree decor
out there that's, it never dies. Anywhere you go,
if there's an avian, you'll surface somewhere
pretty quick. Let's talk about leadership. Did
you have any position of leadership in the court?
Well, my senior year I was on the regimental staff,
which I guess you'd say was position leadership
but I was not in the company ranks I was I was on the
core staff I mean on the regimental staff I guess it
was so uh that that's the first uh movement of uh out
of the blind so to speak right so I was uh I thought I
was proud of it oh your duties there Oh not uh not
significant it's more you felt I guess a sense of
pride of being put there probably I had less duties
than if I'd been in one of the companies as far as you
know things to do but uh we we had some
responsibilities of planning maneuvers and
planning you know at summer camp bivouacs and this
sort of thing so there was there were some of the
responsibilities that he would not have had just I
guess down in the ranks now you meant let's talk
about the things you liked and you disliked about
the corps you've already mentioned that you like
the uniform and you like the marching you like the
parades you like the camaraderie any other things
that you liked about the corps I always
I always enjoyed being around army officers, the
regular army officers who were our supervisors.
Why? Why? Something about the military that I
liked. I liked, I guess, a lot of the ways they wore
the uniform. I liked to listen to some of the, of
course, many of them were World War II, I mean,
World War I, and then
the old sergeants that were the backbone that ran
the army you know back in the peacetime days I guess
is the amount of chatter and big stories they told
and you know you took in all that stuff we were young
and aggressive and Nobody ever thought we'd go to
war, I'm sure. But I don't know. There's just
something about the military that fascinated me.
I enjoyed it.
I enjoyed being obedient to my superiors. I
enjoyed the opportunity, as I've said two or three
times, when they gave you something to do, to do it
well. I always like to do it well. And the military
lends itself to that more than civilian officers.
And I like people to be obedient. I like people to
take orders, and if they're proper and good, to
carry them out to the nth degree. So the military
just lends itself to that sort of thing. Over the
years, I've availed myself of all the military
schooling that I ever got an opportunity to go to,
and I've been to a lot of them. It's
enjoyable. That's the best description I can
give. Now, you said you liked some of the regular
Army officers. Any in particular that had an
impact on you? Well, I was in school when this Major
General Moore was a commandant.
He was a full colonel at that time, who later was
commanding Corregidor and was taken prisoner.
And his bearing and posture used to just fascinate
me. He was straight as a poker. he came around he
would talk to freshmen or sophomores or you know
anybody that that wasn't what he did all the time
but when you were out on drill you know it never did
surprise you if he stopped and talked to you. He was
one of them in a major hill who was a Coastal
Artillery Officer. I don't know they were sort of
idols as far as officers. You'd say as far as, I
mean, you'd go as far as saying that they were
idols. Yeah.
But I never dreamed ever going that high in the
military. Really? No, I didn't. Why do you think
that is? I don't know. I just, I really never
thought about this parallel career in the
military at that point. I don't think I really I
don't think I really aspired to it. I
guess it was so remote to think of World War II. It
was so remote to think of all the reserve
possibilities that did develop. It was just
completely out of the realm of my aspirations,
probably.
In fact, when I got called to World War II, I assumed
I'd be home in a year because I was called for a year.
War hadn't started and I left home I told them I'd be
back in a year. But as the thing went along and at the
end of the year they kept the officers who were
so-called more efficient the ones that were goal
breaking and we used to say that we were penalized
for being more efficient because they gave us
orders to go on and and they turned loose some of the
guys that were they wanted to be there and that
always seemed a little unfair to me at the time but I
think you understand that that's right that's the
way it is that's right that's right at the time we
said you know if they goof off they're gonna get to
go home you know it's kind of unfortunate in a way uh
in the service in that respect because when they
get somebody that they can count on then they just
overburden the guy with words at least I know from
my experience in the enlisted corps but when they
get somebody that goes wrong but then they don't
even bother the guy that's what I'm trying to get
rid of. And that's where you let them get out. Yeah
but that that was a that was a strange thing we read
it. I don't think I'd have wanted to be the only one
that got out because The ones that got out, we said,
you know, let them go. We're not interested in
them. And if I'd have gone, I'd have had a feeling,
you know, that they didn't really want me anyhow.
Down deep, you don't want to be left out.
Now, we've talked about things you liked about the
car. Anything you disliked? Oh, I'm sure there
was... you know it's not something I guess I can put
my hand on though at the time I'm sure there were
times that I'd probably rather been doing
something else than cleaning the gun or getting
the cosmoline off the rifle or digging the slit
trench or something like that but it went along
with it but as far as having a particular dislike I
don't think I had any dislikes You know, there
wasn't any, now that you think back on the Corps in
the late 1930s, there weren't anything that you'd
say, boy that should have been changed, it would
have made it better. I don't really think so. It's
uh, and I guess I'm comparing it to nowadays, it was
so superior as far as I'm concerned, and the uh, the
attitude that the fellas had, Today, I mean,
comparing it today, you think it was superior back
in the 30s than today. Well, I'm not that close to
the core anymore, but a number of times you get the
feeling that they just, some of them don't have the
attitude
of excellence that they used to have. Oh, really?
Well, how do you get that feeling? I don't really
know. And I think really... I relate it to the
military and I'm letting it spill off back to the
Coral because I'm certain as I'm sitting here that
the military doesn't have it. The field ain't a
vaccine. We're going to talk about the military.
And I'm afraid that I let that filter back to the
core, and it may be unfair, but I love to see that
core. I love to watch them and all this. I hope I'm
wrong, but you know, sometimes you generalize
when you shouldn't. Do you think that the core had
any effect on the fact that you became a leader?
Yeah. How? Well, you saw people, you saw people who
were, who were moving out ahead. You want
something with me Lucille? You saw people who were
moving out ahead, you'd see people who, first
thing you know they were company commanders, they
were corps commanders, they were cadet colonels,
And when I see people that are excelling, I like to
excel. And I think it gave me a feeling of, well,
here's the way you do it. So it definitely had a
place. It also gave me a feeling of...
consideration of superiors, consideration of
elders. Well, didn't you have that consideration
from your parents? Yeah, but I'll tell you what,
the military helped that. Yes, I had a very great
feeling of obedience to my parents, but the
military, you saw it every day. Somebody answered
to everybody. and I could see from the early stages
that the military was built on obedience and being
able to carry out orders and to fulfill your
responsibility. That's what the military is
built on and that instilled with the background
that I had then that instilled in me those things
that You know, I think today are absolutely
essential to a person who's going to succeed.
A little interesting incident. I was a real good
friend of General Rutter's. Do you know who
General Rutter is? Being with the highway
department and the position I had, we had a lot of
common problems with the university. And I've
been in many sessions with him personally. I
remember one time I was referring to him as Mr.
Rutter. I'd say, Mr. Rutter, so-and-so. He said,
I'd love for you to call me Earl. He was a two-star
general. At that time, I was probably a full
colonel. He was several years my senior. I told
him, I said, Mr. Rutter, there's no way that I could
call you Earl. I said, first place, you're a senior
to me in the military, and you're a senior to me in
AIDS. I've got to call you Mr. Utter. He said, okay,
but I just sent you to call me Earl. I could no more
have called him Earl than I could have flown out of
this window.
Why didn't you call him General? Well, at that
time, he was president of the university in
civilian status. And whenever we were on military
duty together, he was General Rudder. But I
referred to him as Mr. Rudder.
I tell you, it had been just like sticking a sword in
me to have said Earl to him. Even though you had fine
relations? Oh, absolutely. I had a great respect
for him. And, you know, what he told me, I took for
the gospel truth. But I couldn't call him Earl. I
had never called a superior in the military by
first name. He was always Colonel, General,
Major. And I called him my boss. Every, I never
called him anything but Mr. Lane. He was Mr. as far
as I was concerned. And I couldn't call him Earl at
all. He had a lot of my peers that were sort of on my
level in other areas. I called him O.D. Butler. I
called him Jocko Roberts and all this sort of
thing. And he's my superior in rank and superior in
age. He was Mr. as far as I was concerned. And that, I
expect, probably changed the military. Yeah.
Now, let's think back on your career for a minute.
What way do you think that the Corps, besides what
you just mentioned, that the Corps helped your
career?
Well, I think, of course appreciation for your
fellow man. Right. And again, appreciation for
being able to depend on somebody. I think that
whole lot stemmed from the military. And being
able to pick people that you could observe in their
everyday operation for leaders in your
organization.
So, in other words, you could generalize from the
military to the highway. That's right. Find men
that you could depend on in your civilian
occupation or people who could become future
leaders. Yes, I think, I think, I think it gave you
an ability to watch a person perform and see how you
handle men. That's one of the things that the
military always struck me is how you handle men.
And a lot of people can do things themselves, but
they can't handle men. They can't direct people.
And you see a great deal of that in the military and
out there, even though I was an officer in my senior
year. If a man was tabbed as company commander,
then he was in charge. And even though I was of a
level with him, he was designated the man. And he
had the responsibility. And what he told me to do,
you know, I took it. He was given that
responsibility. And that has spilled over in the
highway business, or any other business, is that
when an organization is set up and the man is
appointed in charge, then that's the man that you
look to. And even though he may not be any more
educated, he may not be any more immediately
capable, he's got something that somebody said to
him, you're it. And that started in the military.
It started in the Corps. Here's a man that's a
platoon leader, here's a man that's a right guide
or whatever, and you come on up, and here's the top
man. He's been tapped. You could recognize that
quality. You could recognize it. So those things
started early in the Corps of Cadets. Now, as you
think back, do you think that there's any way in
which the Corps of Cadets might have hindered your
career in any way? I don't know how it would have
been. I sure don't know.
Here would be, this would be the only thing that I
could see, and I can't call that an interest now,
had I not gone in the military. I don't know what my
World War II status would have been.
Let's just say that I had not been called and I had
not been drafted for some reason. I had five more
years of experience in my civilian occupation. I
might have been five years further up the ladder.